Title:Acute Encephalopathy Associated with Influenza A Infection in Adults
 Authors: ['Lee, Nelson', 'Wong, Chun Kwok', 'Chan, Paul K.S.', 'Lindegardh, Niklas', 'White, Nicholas J.', 'Hayden, Frederick G.', 'Wong, Edward H.C.', 'Wong, Ka Shing', 'Cockram, Clive S.', 'Sung, Joseph J.Y.', 'Hui, David S.C.']
 AbstractWe report acute encephalopathy associated with influenza A infection in 3 adults. We detected high cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma concentrations of CXCL8/IL-8 and CCL2/MCP-1 (CSF/plasma ratios >3), and interleukin-6, CXCL10/IP-10, but no evidence of viral neuroinvasion. Patients recovered without sequelae. Hyperactivated cytokine response may play a role in pathogenesis.
: by nasopharnygeal aspirate/IFA; patient 1 did not receive antiviral treatment. Both patients recovered in the next 2 days. Patient 3 had fever, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation requiring noninvasive ventilatory support, complicated by acute coronary syndrome. He was given oseltamivir, 75 mg 2×/day, after infl uenza A infection was confi rmed. Agitation and confusion developed in the patient on day 3-4 of illness (onset after the third dose of oseltamivir), despite resolution of the patient's respiratory failure. These symptoms were followed by involuntary, tremulous movements involving all 4 limbs, while at rest and during movement. Brain CT scan was normal. Electroencephalogram showed generalized slowing. Oseltamivir was stopped after the ninth dose, but tremor persisted. CSF analyses showed no pathogen or pleocytosis. The patient's symptoms resolved in the next 3-4 days without sequelae.
Despite apparently normal CSF fi ndings, high concentrations of cytokines/chemokines were detected in the CSF and plasma specimens of all patients (Table 2 ). Plasma concentrations of IL-6, CXCL8/IL-8, CXCL10/IP-10, CCL2/ MCP-1, and CXCL9/MIG were elevated at median values of 2.0, 2.8, 11.9, 3.7, and 2.1× the upper limits of their re-spective reference ranges (comparable to or higher than that observed in other hospitalized infl uenza patients) (Table 2) (7). Other cytokines were not elevated (4, 7) . In their CSF, IL-6, CXCL8/IL-8, CXCL10/IP-10, and CCL2/MCP-1 were consistently detected, and were elevated at median values of 2.6, 15.0, 3.4, and 20.0 × the upper limits of their respective plasma reference ranges. The CSF/plasma concentration ratios of CXCL8/IL-8 and CCL2/MCP-1 were >3 (median CSF/plasma ratio 5.4 and 8.0, respectively).
Simultaneous CSF and plasma OC and OP concentrations were determined for patient 3, as symptoms progressed at 18 h after oseltamivir. The concentrations (mean ± SD) of OC in duplicate CSF and plasma samples were 18.3 ± 0.9 ng/mL and 143.8 ± 3.3 ng/mL, respectively; the CSF/plasma concentration ratio was 12%-13%. The OP plasma concentration was 1.05 ± 0.03 ng/mL; it was not detectable in the CSF.
Enterovirus RNA was detected by one-step real-time RT-PCR (3, 4) . Amplification is specific for the 5 untranslated region. Enterovirus RNA extracted from cell-culture fluid of clinical isolate confirmed by immunofluorescent was used as the source of positive control. RNA from the plasmid pAW109 was used as internal control for nucleic acid extraction as well as for the presence of inhibitors in the clinical samples. Primers and probes used were as follows: primer for enterovirus (EV), 5-ACATGGTGTGAAGAGTCTATTGAGCT-3, respectively. The performance of the assay was demonstrated by analysis of 3 replicates of quality control samples at 3 levels. The coefficients of variation (CV%) during the analysis of OP were 4.1%,1.9% and 2.1% at 3 ng/mL, 20 ng/mL, and 150 ng/mL, respectively (limit of detection of OP, 0.25 ng/mL). The coefficients of variation (CV%) during the analysis of OC were 2.3%, 0.5%, and 3.1% at 30 ng/mL, 400 ng/mL, and 4,000 ng/mL, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: We report 3 adults with acute encephalopathy (altered consciousness, confusion) associated with infl uenza. High CSF and blood cytokine/chemokine (CXCL8/IL-8, CCL2/ MCP-1, IL-6, CXCL10/IP-10) levels were detected. No ev- idence of direct viral neuroinvasion was found. All patients recovered rapidly without sequelae (1,6). Our fi ndings agree with studies of infl uenza-associated encephalopathy in children. Infl uenza virus is rarely detected in the CSF, and pleocytosis is often absent (1, 2, (4) (5) (6) . High levels of cytokines (e.g., IL-6, soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 1) can be consistently found in CSF/blood specimens, correlating with disease severity and outcomes (hyperactivated cytokine response is absent in febrile seizure associated with infl uenza) (2) (3) (4) 8) . We found a broader range of cytokines/chemokines being activated (7); for certain cytokines (CXCL8/IL-8, CCL2/MCP-1), the CSF concentrations were 3× those in plasma. IL-6, CXCL8/ IL-8, CCL2/MCP-1 and CXCL10/IP-10 have been shown to play pathogenic roles in CNS viral infections, cerebral injury, and acute brain syndrome in susceptible patients (7, 9, 10, 12) . The high CSF/plasma ratios suggest that for some cytokines, activation within the CNS might have occurred along with respiratory-tract and systemic productions (cytokines are not detected in CSF normally; (Table 2) (4,7-10,12). Resident macrophages/monocytes, astrocytes, microglial and endothelial cells in the CNS are shown to release cytokines/chemokines when stimulated by viral/ infl uenza infection; activation mechanisms without involving overt CNS invasion have been suggested (1, 4, 9, (12) (13) (14) . Cytokines may cause direct neurotoxic effects, cerebral metabolism changes, or breakdown of the blood-brain-barrier (endothelial injury) to produce symptoms (1) (2) (3) (4) 8, (12) (13) (14) .
Whether early viral suppression by antivirals can lead to attenuation of these cytokine responses and better outcomes warrants further study (7) .
We measured oseltamivir concentrations because of the concerns over its neuropsychiatric side-effects in children and adolescents. However, only the active metabolite (OC) was detected in the CSF of patient 3; the CSF/plasma concentration ratio was 12%-13% (18.3/143.8 ng/mL) at 18-hours postdose. This degree of CSF penetration is similar to that observed among healthy patients, with a Cmax CSF/plasma concentration ratio of 3.5% (at ≈8 hours), and a ratio of ≈10% at 18 hours (concentration-time profi les for plasma/CSF differ). Assuming a similar ratio, the CSF OP concentration would have fallen below the assay's detection limit (0.25 ng/mL) by 18 hours (11, 15) . The low CSF drug-penetration, together with high cytokines in CSF and symptom progression despite drug withdrawal suggest that the manifestations of patient 3 may have been diseaserelated. Symptoms developed in patients 1 and 2 without antiviral exposure. Further investigations on the CNS effects of oseltamivir in the clinical setting are needed..
Our study is limited by the small patient number and the lack of feasibility in obtaining CSF for study/comparison in infl uenza patients without neurologic symptoms. Further studies on the clinical spectrum of infl uenza encephalopathy and encephalitis in adults (1, 6) and their pathogenesis are indicated. In conclusion, acute encephalopathy may occur in adults with infl uenza. Exuberant (8) (9) (10) . In a pediatrics influenza cohort, CSF cytokine levels were substantially higher in encephalopathy cases when compared to those with febrile seizure; CSF/plasma concentration was <1 (8) . †CSF cytokine concentrations above plasma reference ranges. ‡CSF/plasma cytokine concentration ratio consistently >3 (3.5-12.1), in addition to CSF cytokine concentrations being above the plasma reference ranges. For IFN-, IL-12p70, TNF-, IL-10, IL-1 and RANTES, because of their low/undetectable levels, the CSF/plasma ratios were not calculated. CSF specimens from patients 1 and 2 were collected at the peak of symptoms, and before antiviral treatment (if given); CSF from patient 3 was collected when persistent tremor developed 18 hours after the ninth dose of oseltamivir; the drug was stopped afterward. cytokine/chemokine response may play an important role in its pathogenesis.