Title:Cost effective strategies for completing the Interactome
 Authors: ['Schwartz, Ariel S.', 'Yu, Jingkai', 'Gardenour, Kyle R.', 'Finley, Russell L.', 'Ideker, Trey']
 AbstractComprehensive protein interaction mapping projects are underway for many model species and humans. A key step in these projects is estimating the time, cost, and personnel required for obtaining an accurate and complete map. Here, we model the cost of interaction map completion across a spectrum of experimental designs. We show that current efforts may require up to 20 independent tests covering each protein pair to approach completion. We explore designs for reducing this cost substantially, including prioritization of protein pairs, probability thresholding, and interaction prediction. The best designs lower cost by four-fold overall and >100-fold in early stages of mapping. We demonstrate the best strategy in an ongoing project in Drosophila, in which we map 450 high-confidence interactions using 47 microtiter plates, versus thousands of plates expected using current designs. This study provides a framework for assessing the feasibility of interaction mapping projects and for future efforts to increase their efficiency.
SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES SUPPLEMENTARY: 1) Gene expression a) Gene expression data throughout embryogenesis have been previously obtained using Affymetrix microarray analysis by Tomancak et al. 1 These data were used to compute Pearson correlation coefficients between -1 and 1 for all pairs of genes. b) Gene expression data covering approximately 5,000 genes though the developmental life cycle of Drosophila have been previously obtained by cDNA microarrays in Dr. Kevin White's group 2 . These data were used to compute Pearson correlation coefficients between -1 and 1 for all pairs of genes. c) We also used pairs of genes that are co-expressed across evolution, i.e. multiple genomes 3 . A pair was encoded as 1 if the two genes are co-expressed in at least two organisms and as 0 otherwise.
2) DOMAIN-DOMAIN INTERACTION: It is believed that most protein-protein interactions are mediated by domain-domain interactions. Interdom is a database of putative interacting protein domains derived from multiple data sources 4 . This attribute was encoded as 1 if the gene pair contains an interacting domain pair, and as 0 otherwise.
3) Interologs (conserved interaction) Similar to Matthews et al. 5 , we defined Interologs as fly protein pairs for which corresponding homologs had been shown to interact in human, yeast, or worm. Interologs were encoded as 1 or 0. a) Human interologs were derived from human protein interaction data downloaded from HPRD 6 . b) Yeast interologs were derived from yeast protein interaction data downloaded from DIP 7 . c) Worm interologs were derived from C. elegans protein interaction data downloaded from DIP 7 .
4) GENETIC INTERACTIONS: Genetic interactions were downloaded from the FlyBase 8 . These data were encoded as 1 if a gene pair is a genetic interaction, and 0 otherwise. 5) Gene Ontology annotations 9 a) Molecular functions: for each pair of genes A-B, we counted how many gene pairs (out of all possible binary gene combinations) have the exact same GO Molecular Function annotations as A-B. b) Cellular components: for each pair of genes A-B, we counted how many gene pairs (out of all possible binary gene combinations) have the exact same GO Cellular Component annotations as A-B. The above two data items have integer values from 0 to 98 million, the number of all possible gene pairs of Drosophila melanogaster. Biological process annotations were reserved for evaluation purpose and were not used in the training process.
6) FLYBASE ANATOMY ANNOTATIONS: FlyBase provides a controlled vocabulary annotating where a gene is expressed 10 . The assumption is that when two proteins are expressed in the same location, they are more likely to interact than proteins not found to be expressed at the same location. Each gene was assigned a list of anatomy terms. This attribute was encoded as 1 or 0, where 1 means two genes share at least one anatomy term and 0 means otherwise.
Obtaining training positives and negatives. We used a set of reported high-confidence yeast two hybrid results (2,689 interactions) as our positive training examples. Specifically, we took the union of the following as our positive training set: 1) Interactions from Giot et al. 11 with confidence score greater than 0.8. 2) Interactions from Stanyon et al. 12 with reporter score sums greater than 3.
3) Interactions from Formstecher et al. 13 with scores of 'A', 'B', or 'C'. These authors assigned confidence scores to their data such that A > B > C > D > E.
Negative training examples were synthesized by selecting random protein pairs. Any interactions that had been detected by the yeast two-hybrid screens were deleted from this set (to enrich for true negatives). The final negative training set contained 131,761 random pairs of Drosophila genes.
Computational evaluation of prediction results. The accuracy of the predictions was assessed using the technique of five-fold cross-validation. By this approach, 20% of the positive and negative data are withheld during training and, once training is completed, the model predictions are tested on the withheld data. This process is repeated five times, with a different fraction of data withheld each time. The average precision over these five trials was 89%; the recall was 27%.
As another means of evaluating prediction results, we withheld GO Biological Process annotations from training and prediction and instead used them to score the biological relevance of the predicted interactions. We computed the number of pairs sharing at least one annotation as well as the average depth of shared annotations. We then generated 2000 sets of random gene pairs, each set with as many pairs as we predicted, and computed the above two indexes for all random sets. The actual predicted interactions had a much larger number of pairs sharing GO biological process annotations (5832) than the distribution of shared annotations among random pairs, which had a maximum value of 740 (p<2.2 x 10 -16 ). Similarly, the average depth of shared annotations for the predictions (7.5) was significantly larger than the depths of the sets of random pairs, which reached a maximum of 6.5 (<2.2 x 10 -16 ).
Yeast two-hybrid test of predicted interactions. We used the LexA-based yeast twohybrid mating assay 14 to test two sets of predicted interactions: 469 protein pairs predicted to interact by Sharan at al. 15 based on cross-species conservation, and 2047 interactions predicted using a classifier built on multiple lines of evidence (see main text). At the same time, we tested a background set of 2354 randomly selected pairs of proteins. Assays were conducted using sequence-verified yeast two-hybrid clones as previously described 16 . Briefly, BD and AD yeast clones were re-arrayed into 96-well plates (using a Beckman Biomek Span 8 robot) and grown to saturation in 100 µl of the appropriate media for each clone type. A Beckman Biomek FX 96-channel robot was used to plate 6µl of each clone type onto a single YPD plate, which was then incubated for 36-48 hours to allow mating and formation of diploids. Yeast cells were replicated to two different diploid selection plates to assay for two-hybrid reporter activity: one plate lacking leucine to assay the LEU2 reporter, and the other containing X-Gal to assay the lacZ reporter. Growth on the Leu-plate and "blueness" on the X-Gal plate were scored using scales of 0 -3 and 0 -5, respectively, as previously described 17 . These two values were corrected by subtracting the LEU2 or lacZ scores that the BD clone produced by itself (in a separate auto-activation assay). Pairs for which the sum of corrected LEU2 and lacZ scores exceeded 0.9 were recorded as positives. The quantitative results for all assayed pairs are shown in Supplementary Table 2 .
Interaction probability model. We use a naïve-Bayesian probabilistic model to compute the posterior probability that proteins i and j interact in vivo given the experimental evidence at time t. The results of two experiments on a given interaction are assumed to be conditionally independent if they employ different assay types or different orientations (i as bait and j as prey vs. j as bait and i as prey). The prior probability is set as the background probability for an interaction or using the probability assigned by a classifier via network conservation or other predictive features. 
For brevity we write this expression as .
Using Bayes rule we get ) (
is the prior probability that i and j interact, is the unconditional probability of observing experimental results x 1 through x t and can be expressed as:
Dividing by the numerator gives:
Using the conditional independence assumption and can be expressed as the product of t independent probabilities: . Two-phase pooling. For strategies that utilize two-phase pooling experiments, a pooling-sensitivity parameter  is defined. Intuitively, this parameter represents the probability that a pool with a single detectable interaction will show a positive result. Given a pool of 96 AD clones mated with a single BD clone, k is defined to be the number of assay-specific detectable interactions in the sample space (k ≤ 96). Assuming that all detectable interactions in the sample space are independently likely to contribute to a positive pool, the probability that the pool does not show a positive result is , and the probability that the pool shows a positive result is given by (at least one success in k independent Bernoulli trials).
According to the two-phase pooling protocol, every positive BD clone from phase I is individually mated with the 96-well AD array in phase II. Since direct mating is highly reproducible using the same assay type 17, 18 , we assume that the results of direct mating are deterministic given , the detectability of an interaction in a given assay type.
However, when the include multiple pooled experiments using the same assay type, the interaction probability update equation is more involved. This is due to the fact that repeated pooled experiments are conditionally independent only given the detectability , but not given alone. Therefore,
Assuming that k is small (which is generally true for most pools) we can approximate
Substituting back, and using simple induction we get the following update rules.
Protein pairs in the sample space of the first phase that do not show a positive BD clone have their posterior probabilities updated using the following equation: 
captures the number of times pair ij has been in the sample space of the first phase of a pooling experiment using assay type
showing a positive result. When an interaction is tested directly in the second phase of a pooling experiment its posterior probability is updated as follows: 
Lower and upper thresholds. The Thresholding and Prediction strategies stop testing a protein pair once its posterior probability of interaction is greater than the upper bound (P u ) or less than the lower bound (P l ).
, where FDR is the target falsediscovery-rate (95%). This ensures that the interactome map at any time t always includes less than 1 -FDR false positives. The lower bound is defined in order to stop testing protein pairs that are very unlikely to interact in vivo. This reduces the cost spent on testing non-interacting pairs, which compose the majority of the candidate interactions. The lower bound is a function of the target coverage level (C), and should leave out less than 100(1 -C) percent of the true interactions. We estimate the lower bound by defining L to be the smallest integer, such that the probability that a true interaction be tested directly L times with zero positive results is less than 1 -C. This leads to the following inequality: C fnr L   1 . 
: Mapping a complete gene or protein network evokes similar challenges and considerations as mapping a complete genome sequence. In the case of the human and model genome projects, large-scale sequencing efforts were accompanied by a series of feasibility studies27,28 which used mathematical formulations and pilot projects to explore strategies for genome assembly and the work required for each. In the case of interaction networks, similar feasibility studies are just beginning29-31. Some of the questions to be addressed are: What is the cost of completing an interactome map and what is the best strategy for minimizing that cost? Given practical cost constraints, how can the quality and coverage of interaction data be maximized? How many independent assay types are needed? How should direct pairwise tests for interaction be combined with pooled screening? What is the effect of the test sensitivity on the final cost? How should interaction predictions be incorporated, and what is their effect on the mapping cost? Which specific improvements to experimental and computational methods are likely to have the largest effect?
To approach these questions, we modeled several standard and alternative strategies for using pairwise protein interaction experiments to determine the interactome of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Our analysis shows that completing the interactome using sequential pairwise or pooled screening is probably too costly to be practical. However, this cost can be reduced substantially using a strategy that combines pooling with prioritized testing and interaction prediction. We carry out several iterations of this strategy to efficiently map 450 new high confidence interactions in Drosophila.
INTERACTOME MAPPING-PROBLEM DEFINITION: In contrast to a genome, the interactome has been more difficult to define. Some authors have argued32 that the "True Interactome" should be defined as all possible interactions encoded by a genome-i.e., the set of all pairwise protein interactions that occur in at least one biological condition or cell type. The assumption is that every true interaction will be detectable by some assay, and that given enough independent measurements, most of the interactome could be detected. Many assay types have been described for detecting proteinprotein interactions, a few of which have been adapted to large-scale screening1,32-34. On the other hand, some interactions may be immeasurable by any available assay, or will not arise in the conditions surveyed. Therefore, we use the term "Mappable Interactome" for the subset of true pairwise interactions that are reproducibly detectable by any given assay method or combination of methods.
To define appropriate criteria for determining when an interactome map is "complete", we distinguish between the terms saturation and coverage. Saturation measures the percentage of true interactions that have been experimentally observed at least once. Coverage we define more strictly to mean the percentage of true interactions that have been experimentally validated with high confidence such that the percentage of false interactions (i.e., the False Discovery Rate or FDR) is kept below a predetermined threshold. We treat "completion" as achieving 95% coverage of the Mappable Interactome at 5% FDR, which requires that the map include at least 95% of all true interactions with no more than 5% of the reported interactions being false.
A MODEL OF INTERACTOME COVERAGE: We simulated a series of mapping strategies implementing a variety of basic and sophisticated features ( Fig. 1 ; Flowcharts of each strategy are provided in Supplementary  Fig. 1 ). All strategies were evaluated using a statistical model based on naïve Bayes to estimate saturation and coverage of the Drosophila interactome as a function of the number of interaction tests. We programmed this model with the assumption that the fly interactome contains approximately 105 interactions overall, along with estimates for the false positive rate (FPR-the probability that a non-interacting protein pair is reported as interacting) and the false negative rate (FNR-the probability that an interacting pair is reported as noninteracting). Although the magnitudes of these errors are still under debate, previous studies2,5,29,35,36 have reported Y2H error rates of FPR < 1% with FNR in the range 50-80% (note that several of these studies erroneously refer to FDR as FPR). Here, we used 0.2% FPR and 66% FNR.
Due to the high FNR of a particular assay, it becomes clear that multiple assay types will likely be needed to achieve complete coverage, and that these assays should be independent or at least only partially dependent. Although the precise correlations between different assay types have not been well studied, complementarity between assays has been widely assumed and occasionally demonstrated: For instance, protein interactions have been shown to be of substantially higher confidence if they are detected in different orientations (baitprey vs. prey-bait)2; in different Y2H screens3,8,35; by different types of Y2H system such as LexA-based vs. Gal4-based36; or by both Y2H and co-affinity purification29.
BASIC MAPPING STRATEGIES IN CURRENT USE: We first simulated a "Basic serial" strategy, in which all pairs of proteins are tested for interaction sequentially. Under this formulation, achieving a saturation of 95% required eight comprehensive screens, in which each protein pair was tested by eight independent assays, equivalent to ~7×108 pairwise tests assuming a total of 13,600 protein-encoding genes in fly37 (Table 1 and Fig. 2a) . Moreover, 93% of all observed interactions in this network were false positives (including 99% of interactions observed exactly once and 21% of interactions observed twice- Fig. 2b ). The false-positives predominate because, although the 0.2% FPR seems low, the number of non-interacting protein pairs is far in excess of the number of true interactions.
To ensure an overall FDR < 5%, we found that every interaction must be reported by at least three independent assays. After eight screens 55% of the interactome was covered under these conditions. The coverage goal of 95% was achieved only after 21 comprehensive pairwise screens (Fig. 2c) . This overall outcome-that the number of experiments required to reach full coverage is two to three times that required to reach saturation-was observed over a range of error parameters (Supplementary Table 1 ). Clearly, completing the interactome map under these conditions is impractical, as it would require testing 92 million protein pairs 21 separate times.
To reduce the number of tests, assays such as Y2H typically use pooled screens in which a single protein "bait" is tested for interaction against pools of protein "preys" (phase I) 38 . For pools that test positive, pairwise tests are immediately conducted between the bait and each prey in the pool (phase II-this second phase can also be conducted by sequencing3,5). The benefit of pooling is that large numbers of potential interactions can be sampled at relatively low cost. This comes at the expense of FNR, as the chance a true interaction is missed in the pool is higher than the chance it would be missed by direct pairwise tests38. Through simulation, we found that basic two-phase pooling (Pooling strategy) does indeed achieve a four-to five-fold reduction in coverage cost over pairwise testing (~4 million plates for Pooling compared to ~20 million plates for Basic-serial, Table 1 ). However, assuming the rate of interaction screening of a typical laboratory (e.g., ~2400 plate-matings per person per year), pooled screens would still require approximately 1700 person-years to achieve completion of the Drosophila protein network.
ADVANCED MAPPING STRATEGIES: We next considered an interaction mapping strategy that, rather than treat all protein pairs equally, maintains a rank-ordered list of pairs according to their probabilities of interaction (Thresholding strategy, Table 1 ). All probabilities start at the background frequency of interaction for random protein pairs (as for Basic-serial and Pooling). Protein interactions are initially tested using pooled screening, and after each two-phase pooled experiment the probabilities increase for interactions that are observed and decrease for interactions that are tested but not observed. Unlike previous strategies, however, protein pairs with probability greater than an upper threshold (i.e., 95%) are declared to be definite "interactors" and are removed from subsequent testing (Fig. 1b) . Likewise, interactions with probability beneath a lower threshold are declared to be "non-interactors" and are also removed from further consideration. The motivation for thresholding is to more quickly exclude the overwhelming number of non-interacting protein pairs. Finally, candidate interactions are defined as those with probabilities between the upper threshold and background. When candidates are available they are always tested immediately using pairwise assays, before resorting to pooling, until their probabilities are pushed above the upper threshold or below background. The motivation for prioritizing candidate interactions is to more quickly cover the interactions likely to be positive. Overall, Thresholding resulted in more than a two-fold cost reduction compared to Pooling (Table 1 and Fig. 3a ).
Lastly, we considered whether computational prediction of interactions, based on prior knowledge and data, could hasten the time to interactome completion. A variety of prediction methods have been proposed based on evolutionary conservation39-41-i.e., transfer of interaction measurements from one species to another-or based on integrating conservation with additional features such as co-expression and co-annotation42-47. Such predictions impact the experimental design by setting the prior probabilities of interaction for each protein pair in lieu of background probabilities. In the Prediction strategy, we explored the effect of setting these prior probabilities using theoretical prediction methods simulated over a range of predetermined prediction accuracies (a range of different values for FPR, FNR, and corresponding FDR of the predictions). We found that even predictors with very high FDRs could have a major impact on the mapping cost (Table 1 and Fig. 3b) . For example, a predictor with 92.2% FDR gave a four-fold reduction in cost over Pooling, with a >50-fold reduction in cost to achieve 50% coverage and a savings of hundreds of fold in the early stages of mapping. Moreover, the 92.2% FDR means that even a predictor that makes 12 false predictions for every true one can lead to a major reduction in the cost of interactome completion. The best prediction method required approximately 385 personyears to achieve 95% coverage of the Drosophila protein network and 12 person-years to achieve 50% coverage. Thus, while obtaining full coverage of an interactome map may still be some years away, a draft scaffold providing half coverage might be feasibly achieved by a team of ~12 technicians working over a period of one year.
FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE: AN EXPERIMENTAL PROOF-OF-CONCEPT: Given the high performance of the Prediction strategy in simulations, we explored an experimental implementation in which Drosophila protein interactions were predicted using the cross-species method of Sharan et al.39 (Fig. 4a ). According to this method, existing protein interaction networks in yeast, worm, and fly are aligned based on sequence similarity to identify conserved interaction clusters, and these alignments are used to transfer interactions that have been observed in some species but not yet in others (Fig. 4b) . A total of 1,294 interactions were predicted using this method, each of which was prioritized as a candidate with high prior probability (92.4%) based on the FDR reported by Sharan et al.39 (7.6%).
Since this prior was much greater than the background probability of other protein pairs (0.1%), we began by using the pairwise Lex-A Y2H assay48 to test all 606 predictions for which sequence-verified clones were available. Of these, 136 tested positive and 470 negative. After each 96-well plate of tests (seven plates total), the interaction probabilities were updated resulting in an increase to >99.9% for pairs testing positive and a decrease to 90.5% for pairs testing negative. Since the 136 positives now had probability greater than the upper threshold (95%), all of these could be added to the interactome map and removed from further testing.
Although the remaining 470 predictions had tested negative once, their high probability (90.5%) still prioritized them as candidate interactions. Therefore, as dictated by the Prediction strategy these pairs were tested again immediately using a second assay type.
For this second assay, Lex-A Y2H was run in a "reverse" orientation in which the two proteins cloned as bait and prey, respectively, were exchanged as prey and bait. We tested 251 of the 470 predictions for which sequence-verified clones were available in the opposite orientation. This resulted in 35 positives, elevating these interactions to probability >99.9% and adding them to the map. The pairs that tested negative in the reverse orientation were downgraded to 88.1% probability. Overall, after performing Y2H in both forward and reverse orientations, 171 new interactions were identified out of 606 protein pairs for a success rate of 28%. Although we ended our experimentation at this point, the Prediction strategy could be continued by next testing the "double negatives" (pairs testing negative in both orientations of Lex-A Y2H) using a third type of assay such as Gal4-based Y2H.
A means of predicting additional protein interactions is to probabilistically integrate many different lines of evidence into a single classifier42-47. Along these lines, we applied a machine-learning-based classifier for predicting interactions that combined many relevant features including gene expression, domain-domain interactions, conserved protein-protein interactions, genetic interactions, and shared gene annotations (Supplementary Methods). We used this approach to generate 24,798 high confidence predictions. We randomly selected 2,047 of these for testing using forward-orientation Y2H and, as above, retested the negative pairs using reverse-orientation Y2H (for which clones were available). In total, this procedure added 279 new high-confidence interactions to the map for a 13.6% success rate. Combined over both conservation-based and multiple-evidence-based predictions, 450 new protein-protein interactions were added to the Drosophila map using 47 96-well plates (Fig.  3a,b) . To establish the background rate of interaction, we also tested 2,354 randomly chosen pairs, 72 of which were positive yielding a 3% background rate (Fig. 4b) . These results show that both types of prediction are highly enriched for true interactions. Note that even if all predicted interactions were true, the expected confirmation rate would be limited by the false negative rate of the Y2H assay, equal to 1-FNR =33% in our model.
TESTING THE CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE BETWEEN ASSAY TYPES: An underlying assumption of our simulations is that different assay types are conditionally independent-i.e., given that a tested protein pair is known to be positive or negative, the result of one assay is uncorrelated with that of another. To examine the extent to which this assumption holds, we compared Y2H data for protein pairs tested in both forward and reverse orientations-the two assay types used in our study. Overall, we obtained Y2H tests in both orientations for 309 conservation-based predictions (including data reported above combined with additional tests; Supplementary Data). Of these, we observed 58 positives in the forward orientation and 50 positives in the reverse orientation, for an average positive rate of 17% [(58 + 50)/(309 * 2)]. Fifteen positives were found in both orientations, representing 4.9% of the tests. Assuming all predictions are true interactions, this percentage is very close to that predicted by conditional independence, for which 3.1% of tests are expected to be positive in both orientations [17% ^ 2]. If some predictions are not true as expected, the percentages come into even better agreement-e.g., a prediction FDR of 20% predicts that 4.8% positives would arise in both orientations. A similar analysis was performed on a set of 1,572 combined-evidence predictions that were tested in both orientations, leading to similar agreement with the conditional independence assumption.
DISCUSSION: The interactions predicted by cross-species conservation were at least as accurate as we had assumed in our simulations. On the other hand, their power to prioritize interactions is dependent on the network coverage in other species, and the long-term viability of this approach will depend on obtaining greater numbers of predictions than the 1,294 that are currently available. As interactome maps progress across an ever-widening array of species, these maps might be dynamically cross-compared to continually generate sufficient numbers of candidate interactions for testing. The second set of predictions, made by integrating various lines of evidence, had a lower success rate than the predictions based solely on conservation. Their potential utility is higher, however, since the number of available predictions is nearly 20 times that of the conservation-based predictions and could be increased further by including lower confidence predictions. Even with a lower success rate, the performance of the integrated classifier was superior to the best theoretical predictor we simulated.
Predictions lead to a lower interactome mapping cost for two reasons. First, predicted protein pairs are much more likely than arbitrary pairs to be true. Second, protein pairs with high prior probabilities do not require repeated positive measurements to confirm them as true interactions. Both effects underlie the finding that 450 new predicted interactions could be added to the interaction map using just 47 microtiter plates. In contrast, the Pooling strategy would require nearly 105 plates to add this number of interactions to the map.
One might intuitively object that, rather than test predicted interactions, a better strategy would focus on the "novel" areas of the interactome that have never before been suggested by any species or data set. The problem with such an approach is that it would very quickly produce an interactome map with a very high error rate. Conversely, the rationale behind the Thresholding and Prediction strategies is that one should first clean up the map by validating predicted interactions using real experiments, and only then resort to testing random protein pairs in pools.
A second objection might be that prioritizing candidate interactions requires the corresponding Y2H baits and preys to be rearrayed in microtiter plates in different orders over the course of an interaction mapping project. While the cost of rearraying was not included in our analysis, in our lab (Finley) these costs are greatly alleviated through robotic transfer systems. Certainly, failure to rearray leads to a ~4-fold increase in cost and a ~10fold increase in the early stages of mapping (compare Pooling versus Prediction in Table 1 ).
Regardless, mapping the Interactome remains a daunting task. Our study makes it clear that achieving 95% coverage of an interactome requires many more screens than one pass through all pools or over all protein pairs. If complete coverage is to be obtained in the near future, it will be necessary to invoke better strategies for experimental design, technologies reporting fewer false negatives, or both. In terms of experimental design, we have shown that the cost of completion is reduced substantially by careful ordering of pooled screens. In terms of technology, our study underscores the importance of decreasing the FNR or of different assays that provide independent samples of a protein pair. Even if the error rates are lower than assumed here, advanced mapping strategies are still likely to be worthwhile (Suppl. Table 1 ). Here we have used two types of Y2H assay, forward and reverse orientations, to obtain multiple samples which appear largely independent. If the assays were partially dependent, multiple tests might still be worth the cost as long as they were not perfectly correlated (and the dependence could be handled quantitatively using a statistical model). In the present study, the conditional independence assumption leads to a "best-case scenario" or lower-bound on the number of interaction tests that will likely be required to achieve full coverage of an interactome. Further work will be needed to better characterize the relative dependencies among the wide range of other interaction assays that are currently available-if the current assays are highly dependent, then the required number of tests will be greater than was estimated here.
SIMULATION PROCEDURE: "True" reference interactomes for fly and human were generated by random sampling of interactions from the set of all possible pairs of proteins using the interaction probabilities in the String database46. Protein pairs not included in the String database were sampled using a low background probability, such that the total number of interactions in the sampled interactomes agreed with current estimates of interactome sizes30 (~100,000 fly interactions and ~260,000 human interactions). The detectability of each protein pair was independently sampled for each new assay type (representing a new type of measurement technology or new bait/prey orientation) using a 66% FNR for true interactions and 0.2% FPR for false interactions (corresponding to 82% FDR). Once an interaction was defined as "Detectable/ Undetectable", direct pairwise experiments were assumed to be 100% reproducible for a given protein pair and assay. For pooled assays, each detectable interaction in the sample space of a pool was assumed to be observed in the pool with probability equal to the pooling sensitivity (Table 1) . Pools with at least one observed interaction were declared positive. For each strategy, after every 1000 experiments the mapped interactomes were compared to the "true" interactomes and the coverage and FDR were recorded.
YEAST TWO-HYBRID TEST OF PREDICTED INTERACTIONS: We used the LexA-based yeast two-hybrid mating assay48 using sequence-verified clones as previously described36 (Supplementary Methods). All new protein interactions have been submitted to the IMEx consortium (http://imex.sf.net) through IntAct49 and assigned the identifier IM-9552. The data are also available at DroID (www.droidb.org).
ADDITIONAL METHODS: Detailed descriptions of the interaction probability model, the combined-evidence method for interaction prediction, the computation of thresholds, and the yeast two-hybrid test protocol appear in the Supplementary Methods.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL: Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material. (a) At any given point in the project, every pair of proteins is assigned an interaction probability based on its experimental history (initially these probabilities are set to background or informed by predictions). The interaction probabilities and experimental history are used to design a 96-well plate Y2H experiment according to one of the strategies. The result of this experiment is simulated based on the detectability of the tested interactions (given the assay type) and the pooling sensitivity. The new experimental results are recorded in the history and also (b) used to update the interaction probabilities of the relevant protein pairs. The pyramid represents the ordered list of protein pairs ranked by probability. It is wider at the bottom than at the top to reflect that most pairs are negative-i.e., most pairs will have low probability and only a few pairs will percolate to the top of the list with high probability. Interactions with probability above an upper threshold are added to the mapped interactome, which is compared to the simulated "True Network" at intervals of 1,000 plates for reporting coverage and FDR. The false discovery rate (FDR) of interactions that are observed exactly once (orange), twice (purple), thrice (green), four times (yellow), and five times (cyan) as a function of the number of times they are tested with independent assays. To achieve FDR < 5% interactions should be observed at least twice when tested with < 5 independent assays, and at least three times when tested with 5-17 assays. (c) The effective coverage level at FDR < 5% is shown (red curve) by embedding the observation threshold from (b) into the curves of (a). While saturation is achieved after 8 screens, 21 screens are required for 95% coverage at FDR < 5%. * Interaction costs are given in units of total number of plates (K = Thousands, M = Millions) required for 50% or 95% coverage. When 95% coverage is achieved more than once, the greatest cost is presented.